Okay, I'm talking to Kenneth Dowler.
I'll put this close to you because what you say is much more important.
Let's start.
Are you proud of the library, the San Francisco Public Library?
I think it's a world-class facility.
Do you mind if we turn that just only for my tape?
Okay.
I asked you if you're proud of the San Francisco Public Library, and you said it's a world-class facility.
You might just... Right.
I think it was...
magnificent achievement.
Some people in the city have been trying to do it for 30, 40 years.
And I was hired to build a new library, and I did it.
You were specifically hired to build a new library.
I think that's important to point out.
At the time that I was interviewed by Dianne Feinstein, she said, can you build a new library?
And I said, yes.
Did she give you any, quote, marching orders, or did she say, build a library?
Yes.
Well, she only had three months left on her term.
She wanted the library bill because she was starting to realize her own—you know, she was term limited.
And so when elected officials get towards the end of their term, they start thinking of legacies.
So I only worked for her for three months, and then she was off, and Mayor Agnes came.
No, there's no question in my mind.
I was hired by the commission that interviewed me, asked if I could do that, and the mayor asked if I could do that.
To build a library.
Did they have a sense of what they wanted in the library?
Not particularly, no.
I mean, you would—I mean, a library.
Well, they wanted a bigger one.
I mean, the old one was out of space.
They knew that the old one was—if you go back to some of the press clippings from 1986, 87, those years, the press had been writing the old library for a long time, saying that it was a disgrace to the city.
Well, I think, yeah, go back to a column written by Bill Mandel in The Examiner at the time my hearing was announced, where he lists what he considered the ills of the library.
Unclean, unsafe.
I mean, he has a whole column listing.
And you've actually built a number of other libraries prior to coming here, isn't that correct?
Right.
This is my fourth main library.
Really?
But they're smaller, large.
I have probably as much experience in building library buildings as anybody in the public library world.
And the other three are?
Colorado Springs, Casper, Wyoming, and my first library out of Colorado, a small one.
I think they're on your website, too.
I think you list them on the website.
Yeah.
You also wrote a book in 1984 on the library of the future?
No, the electronic.
The electronic library.
Well, people forget the subtitle was the promise and the process.
The book is actually process-oriented and not specifically machine-oriented.
Maybe you could distinguish the difference for me.
Yeah.
Well, the technology's changed.
I mean, back in the time I wrote the book until I got on the bookshelf, half the pictures would have been out of date if I hadn't paid attention to that, because the machines change every twelve to eighteen months.
So it requires a different mindset to be able to deal with it effectively.
At that time in particular, and still a lot of government agencies treat technology as a capital cost, information technology, when in fact it should be treated as an operational cost, because the lifespan of most of the components now are less than two years.
How long have you been involved in libraries, I mean professionally?
Well, I started out as a bookmobile driver in 1961.
And this was in Colorado?
Mm-hmm.
You're from Colorado.
Right.
Okay.
And then how did you actually get into the administration?
Well, I was just finishing my second year of my degree in history at the University of Colorado and needed a job that summer.
So I started driving Bookmobile and they
said that I could continue to work part-time as I finished my B.A.
So I did that.
And then I also worked in a branch library and a number of things there, but mostly driving a bookmobile at that time.
Then I was admitted to library school at the University of Denver.
But that summer I was in my Marine Corps summer camp, and they notified me that Denver had a job that I thought I might be interested in.
The city of Denver?
Denver Public Library.
So I wrote a letter in.
Anyway, and I ended up being hired for that, and that job was one of the very early cooperative interlibrary loan efforts in the 60s, where four counties, Denver and three other counties, had joined a cooperative.
And my basic job was to run the thing.
Essentially what I'd do is I had a panel truck, and I'd drive it all over the libraries in the Denver area.
book in, stop at the library, deliver the books that they'd ordered before, pick up their request slips, and then the next morning I'd go to Denver very early in the morning and I'd find the books that I could find and I'd take them out.
At one point I had a halftime clerk helping file stuff, but I had only done that about nine months, but I enjoyed it because I was out and about and I was driving around and
I got to meet a lot of people.
At that point I pretty well decided I was going to be a librarian.
I was—I did start graduate school at Denver University at the same time.
I was making my rounds one day.
I went into the Arbada Public Library, which was— How do you spell that?
A-R-B-A-D-A.
which at that time was only about twenty-five thousand.
It's a bedroom community of Denver.
And the librarian there was a lady who'd been there twenty-six years, I think.
She had not gone to library school.
And the library was in a little old white house that had been converted.
And I'd gotten to know her on my rounds, as I did most everybody.
And I walked in one day, and she said, I'm retired.
As Liberian.
Right.
I said, gee, we'll miss you.
She said, I'm going back to Kansas where my family is.
And I said, well, we'll miss you.
I mean, sorry to hear that.
And she said, well, yeah, you get down to City Hall, because I told the city manager to hire you.
Okay.
And I said, well, I've only had one class.
And he said, that's all right.
He said, they don't want to pay a degree librarian yet.
So I went down and I interviewed, and we made a deal that I would take over as the library director.
I could rearrange my schedule to go to school, and I started out at
Below what probably normally would have paid a degree of labor in, but over the next year they raised it up.
So I finished, by the time I was 23, I was a library director.
And this was in what year?
1964.
1965 I opened my first library building.
Not very big, only 10,000 square feet.
It's still there.
If you go back there, I think you would be surprised that for a building that's thirty-five years old, still it's pretty darn good.
It's a branch now of the county system, but it's very busy, and the building still looks fresh.
I was there in May, and it was a place to sit.
Anyway, so then I went on there, finished my master's degree.
built the library, got the budget up significantly.
Then in Colorado, they had a lot of places where there was a city library and a county library, and the taxpayers had to pay for both.
So I'm probably one of the few library directors that campaigned myself out of a job by saying it's not fair to the people of Nevada to pay county taxes for a county library that they never use and a city library.
So we actually merged two city libraries with the county library, and I went over to the county as an administrative assistant to the director.
Now, which city libraries are these?
Are we still in the same city?
Well, the city of Arvada, and it was merged into Jefferson County, which is a west side of down
Is it still the Jefferson County Library?
It's now a branch of the Jefferson County Library.
See, this is new to me.
I didn't know there were county libraries.
In New England we don't have county libraries.
Now Colorado and California have city libraries, county libraries, district libraries.
What's the function of a county library as opposed to a city library?
A lot of it's a historic thing in that most public libraries started out as city entities.
But in the 1960s in particular, it was actually Al Gore's father who sponsored federal legislation to take public libraries out to the rural areas, the first Library Services Act.
And so then there was an attempt
Well, when you're going outside the city, then the counties become the next basic jurisdiction.
So, quite a few county libraries were started at that time, but there are some that have been around for a long, long time.
So, that was the first library that you opened, and we may as well go through all of them, if you don't mind, because you've got to, you know.
Well, so I went over to Jefferson County as administrative assistant at a very interesting boss.
He used to be a paper bag student from New Orleans.
Anyway, it didn't take too long, about six months, and I decided I really didn't want to spend any more time there.
So I was thinking about looking for another director job when I was called by the State Librarian of Wyoming, who said, Matrona County Library, which is in Casper,
is looking for a director.
And the librarian died in office, so to speak, and they also—he just passed a bond issue and they want to build a building.
And he said, I know you've done a building.
So I said I hadn't thought much about the middle of Wyoming, but they flew
Jan and I up there, we had an interview.
I liked the trustees, the people.
I still have contact, good friends there.
And so I went to Casper in 1969, built that building.
That one was kind of a half way because it was a—they had an old Carnegie building that was in really bad shape, and they had added a wing to it in 1952.
But they couldn't—the property line was owned by, I think, Northern Pacific or one of the railroad.
So their addition ended up being a triangle.
So it was a really ungainly arrangement of having the old building and then this new triangle thing.
So what the plan was to take the old Carnegie down, build a new wing there, which was actually about
I was three times as big as the triangle.
Anyway, so that was a renovation and construction project, which also taught me some of the headaches of doing renovations, particularly in the library.
So I built that library.
Then about five years later, and at that time I was starting to work with television, cable television.
and more of a computer.
I went to computer school in 1968.
And where was this?
In Denver.
University of Denver?
No, it was an automation training institute.
It was a private, specialized school, and essentially training people to go to work to run, operate computers, program computers.
This was back in the days, the IBM 360.
I learned to program an IBM 360.
And at the time I was doing that, the first disk drives appeared.
So I got pretty knowledgeable about the business systems analysis and how to program it.
I'm not a good programmer anymore.
I don't have enough patience.
But I generally know enough about it to know whether they're performing the way they should, and I kind of pride myself enough to know if a computer salesman are feeding me baloney or not.
So, you know, I phoned in Casper.
I worked—started with a computer.
I designed the county records system for the entire county—the sheriff, the clerk, the treasurer.
The commissioners had been trying to get that done.
They contracted a group out of Los Angeles who messed it up.
And so the chairman called me one day and asked if I'd take that project on.
So I have a great interest in the integration of information technology, ranging from manuscripts to fiber optics.
I've always been a tool-oriented person.
One of the things my father taught me was to take care of the tools and learn how to use them.
What did your father do?
Well, he started out—
He went—a small town, eastern Colorado.
He went to World War I. He got tuberculosis and came back.
His dad ran a hardware store.
So he came back and went into that business, and they failed during the Depression because they gave everybody credit.
And so the hardware store went out of the business.
So my dad became an electrician.
And he was traveling around a lot at the time, all over eastern Colorado and western of that whole area as an electrician.
And he fell out of a grain elevator and spent nearly eight months in the VA hospital.
And the first time I saw him after that, he was in a total body cast.
But he recovered remarkably well, but he couldn't be an electrician anymore because he wasn't mobile enough.
So he learned to be a bookkeeper, and he finished out his career as a bookkeeper for a lumberyard John Deere dealer.
But he said he taught you the importance of taking care of— Well, he had several values.
One was he liked to buy new gadgets.
Not gadgets, but if you see a new paint scraper kind of thing.
bring it home and he'd use it.
And one of the few times I ever saw him mad, he was a very patient person, was if us kids misused his tools, leave them out in the rain or, you know, as kids want to do.
He wouldn't get very mad, but I could tell it upset him a lot.
He always kept his tools.
He could sharpen his knife well.
He could sharpen his own chisels.
He took care of his tools.
And he taught me the value of maintaining your tools and taking care of them.
And so, I mean, his tools were carpentry tools and gardening tools and stuff.
Today we have a whole different array of tools.
I mean, I still do that.
I've done a lot of—I've done carpentry work, and I grew up on a ranch farm country.
But the same thing, I look at computers as tools.
In fact, in the book, The Electronic Library, I talk about the concept of a toolbox.
And anyone in the library business, I feel, needs to have a toolbox, need to have tools in it, need to know how to use them, and need to know how to take care of them.
The other value I learned from him, and probably my entire family, was reading.
He was a voracious reader.
very avid science fiction reader, which I tried, but it was too far out for me.
So what are your reading interests?
Well, it depends on where I'm at.
If I'm into just pure relaxation, I tend to go for historical nonfiction.
I'm interested.
I majored in the British Empire history.
So I still try to track that down.
I enjoyed some fiction, basically more of the suspense thriller, Jean Le Carre, or those kinds of things.
Entertainment stuff?
Yeah, throwaway stuff.
In Europe, I read a number of books they trucked along.
They were just pure entertainment.
You know, going back, I like the thread that we're following, as it is chronological.
But going back to when you were driving the bookmobile and the woman said she's retiring, there's an opening.
But you said you had decided you wanted to be a librarian.
What, you know, what were the factors that went into that?
I mean, why?
Well, I mean, a number of factors.
Working in a book place was nice.
I enjoyed that.
I had a chance on the book, Poohville, because there were some wait times to learn children's literature, because I grew up without children's.
I mean, I knew Winnie the Pooh.
That was about it.
But in my house, all the books were adult books.
So I grew up with Edgar Rice Burroughs and that kind of book.
So I didn't really know children's literature very well.
And so, you know, you've got 15 minutes to kill, you just pull a kid's book and look at it.
So I got off into some of the children's authors, and I really enjoyed them.
And then, of course, I have two sons, and they're voracious readers.
Taught them to read at 18 months.
And so, anyway, that was part of it.
The other part of it, though, the part—and this is the part, I guess, if I have a soapbox or sermon—
In the Book and Bill, I think I really came to see that the magic in a library is the connections.
And so a library is greater than any one of its parts.
A library is greater than its collections.
It's greater than its buildings.
It's greater than its technologies.
It's greater than its librarians.
We bring them together and bring the public into them.
then you start seeing what I call the magic of libraries.
People learning ideas, people exploring, people solving problems, people relaxing, people developing new skills.
And so my focus has always been on bringing together.
One of the reasons I started working with computers so early was you could inventory the collection with the computers, which you could not do on a card-based system unless you had a really little library.
And so I've always felt a book in hand is worth a thousand, which you can't find.
And so while the libraries need the collections, they also need the inventory, they need to know where they are, they need to have them accessible to people.
And a lot of the historical librarianship, the emphasis has been more on collection.
And so things are collected that they don't even know they have anymore.
in every inventory.
The inventory we did at San Francisco for over four years, we inventoried almost two and a half million books, which I, and you can try this when you talk to other librarians, I suspect is the largest library inventory in history because universities don't do inventory.
Library of Congress doesn't have an inventory.
So I'm very proud of that factor, that we, at the same time we were doing the building, at the same time we were doing the technology, at the same time that we were—a tremendous amount of change, we managed to actually locate our—physically locate our books and load them onto the computer.
So you loaded two and a half million books?
It's around that number.
I think it was 2.4 when I left or something like that.
And, you know, and I saw a tape where you were—
Library of the Future, I guess it's called, and you did this around 1989 or so.
And you say on that tape, as a matter of fact, that you were planning for two and a half, that this new building will hold two and a half million books.
What happened?
We may as well get into that at this particular point.
Obviously, it can't hold two and a half million books, and it doesn't.
Well...
The first thing that happened was the Board of Supervisors took fifteen million dollars away from— How many million, I'm sorry?
Fifteen.
Which would have been the seventh level.
When we went in with our building study, the building was planned to be 435,000 square feet.
That required—and the challenge with that building was the building had to have the same footprint as the old one, and it could not exceed the height.
Footprint meaning what?
It couldn't be any whiter or any longer.
Why is that?
Because of the code, the way the Pacific Center is laid out.
So we had to increase the space in the library in the same box, basically.
So there was to be then another lower level, which would have been essentially stacked.
When we went into the budget committee, the chair of the committee, he said, $120 million is too much.
Cut it down.
You also need some money for branches.
Put it in and come back tomorrow.
So the CIO, Rudy Knoppenberg, who was in charge of capital projects and I, went to his office, and we just simply put $5 million in for the branches and went in with $119.
So, anyway, we lost that entire floor.
That reduced the stack space by about 60,000 square feet.
That's factory number one.
Now, my fault—at the time that that happened, I had no way to counter that.
I mean, the chairman of the committee made that decision, and in those days they made those decisions, period.
So he made that decision.
That's what happened.
I did feel that a fallback for that one was because of the old convention center.
Brooksville?
Mm-hmm.
That's why the entrance, the ramp, all of that is designed that way.
That was in there yesterday.
It's designed to essentially be incorporated as the seventh floor of the main library.
Now,
But that has not happened, because the decision to do that is a political decision.
I feel, at least this point, I, up until I walked away, kept the city and the mayor and everybody else from giving it away to somebody else.
Now, I realize it's not clean space—I mean, it's got problems.
But it's the cheapest space that library's ever going to get.
Because for something less than $10 million, you could renovate that and make a reasonably good space for books, collections, manuscripts, and people.
So that, to me, was the only solution.
That's factor number one.
Factor number two was
And when we get into the dumping the book issue, realizing that the San Francisco Public Library had not added one new inch of space to their library system since the 1960s.
So you had a system that had been backing up stuff.
In fact, the fire department threatened to close the main library twice.
because they had books stacked all over everything, and there were big headlines in the paper.
I mean, if you really want to research this, you go back and read the press at that time.
At that time being what?
The 60s?
Starting in the 60s and just working its way, and Peter Wiley's book has more specific references.
So that, anyway, so the first factor was we lost the
60,000 square feet of spades.
The final factor was that the library system had not been discarding at the main library any significant degree for a long, long time.
Now, depending on who you talk to, but standard library practice has been that libraries typically roll over 6 percent of their collection every year.
6 percent?
If you go back into library science in the 60s and 70s, that's what they taught.
And all over meaning that you removed 6 percent?
Weed the collection 6 percent.
Yeah.
And, you know, I must say, Gina said yesterday, you know, this hadn't been done.
I mean, that's why, and so, you know.
Well, you have to go back in the context of the budget battles at the time.
One of the difficulties, the challenges that I had, that frustrated me more than anything else, is I could not get funds to do, quote, administrative stuff, including planning, which was one of the other problems.
And so backroom stuff didn't get done because we were using all of our staff essentially in public service functions.
At the library, when I came, had an inordinately high number of librarians.
I was very short on support staff.
Do you think there were too many librarians?
Compared to other libraries in this country at that time, they had more than most.
No, I don't think they had too many librarians.
I think they didn't have enough support staff.
So there was no unit and no staff to actually systematically go through the weeding process, evaluate the books, and look for things that had value of them beyond the regular, everyday library stuff.
In fact, one of the things I did when I came, I noticed that there were books on the shelf, on the open shelves, that were, in fact, rare books.
process of moving them to special collections.
In fact, one of the things I did before I left, I hired an honest-to-God trained rare book specialist.
Also hired the city's first real archivist.
And that's Susan?
Yeah.
She showed me around yesterday.
Interesting.
So, anyway— Who is the rare books person?
Pardon?
Who is the rare books person?
Oh, gee.
He works up there.
That's okay.
He came, I think, just about ten months before I left or something.
We did it at national recruitment.
But anyway, there was no way I could take people off the reference desk or out of the branch libraries to deal with that kind of a program.
The system also did not have a high degree of coordination between the different pieces.
In fact, one of the ranch librarians said, well, I pulled books to read, and I sent them downtown assuming that somebody would check them.
Do that again.
I'm sorry.
One of the librarians said, I was reading—the ranch librarian said, I was reading books—and this is the time of the controversy over the reading of books.
She said, I just assumed if I sent them downtown, somebody down at the main library would look at them and evaluate them.
I want anybody downtown to do that.
I mean, we take people off the reference step.
I mean, it's options and choices, basically.
And the priority, my priority has always been public service to keep the branches.
A lot of people don't realize that, and the charter amendment, the majority of that money went to the branches.
We increased our hours system-wide by 46 percent, and the branches got more money than the main library did.
In a way, the main library got kind of short-sheeted out of that whole deal.
That's a long political story.
The other factor then—I mean, first of all, you take a floor out of the building,
You take a system that is essentially constipated, if you will, had not been renewing the collection.
I mean, the branches literally could not buy another book unless they sent one someplace else.
So one in, one out, basically.
Yeah, because they were stuffed, stuffed.
So, third factor—
Ten was, I mean, when we started out, I had this conversation with Rudy Knothenberg, the Chief of Industry of Officer.
He kept saying, well, why do you need a building that, $400,000?
Why do you need a building that big?
And I just said, he said, how big do you have to build the damn library?
And I said, we need to build it as big as we can get it because we will fill it up.
And the only question is when.
Generally speaking, you build a library, you think at least 20 years of growth.
That was the old planning.
That's what they used to use.
It's very difficult to do.
If you actually have the options, you're smarter to build it to be adding to it on a regular basis.
Adding to the library.
Build it in a modular way that you can continue to.
which is something not possible with the main.
It took virtually every square inch of that block to build it as big as it is, and there's no way architecturally you can add to that building.
So it takes us sort of back to the intersection of automation and collections.
I have never viewed the main library as the be-all, end-all of the library system.
I viewed it perhaps as the flagship
of a fleet of facility.
But I also knew, at some point, collections would be going into remote storage.
And the question was, when?
And the third factor, in that in 1994, 70 percent of the voters voted to essentially double the library's budget, out of which I tripled the collection budget.
So all of a sudden, 1995, 96, if I remember my numbers right, and I was getting in trouble to not, because I don't pay a lot of attention, but I do know that it was either 95, 96, I think it must have been 95, 96, San Francisco Public Library added 160,000 books.
In one year?
Yeah.
We tripled the acquisitions.
Well, what kinds of books do you have?
I think you get 160,000 books in one year.
Well, we've got 26 branches.
Oh, I see, duplication.
Oh, yeah.
And they were processed.
They came through the door.
They went on the shelf.
Technical service essentially had to move 1,000 books a day or they got buried.
And this was in the year just immediately prior to the opening of the building?
Two years before opening.
So that would have been in 94.
So if you actually look at it, remember the building was essentially designed in 1990.
One challenge of the library building of this scale is essentially the process will be 10 years.
And how do you design a building for 10 years now?
I mean, that's tough enough, let alone design one per a hundred.
That's quite challenging.
So, in 1990, we had no—we had a modest growth rate of the collections projected, and Kathy Page has her numbers.
I think it was between 4 and 6 percent.
What percent again, I'm sorry?
Between 4 and 6 percent a year.
When we tripled the book budget,
We essentially went into the mode of, at the rate we were acquiring them, those two years, we would add a million books in about seven years.
I mean, I'm using round numbers, but there's no question it was going up.
So I go back and go back to the voters and get another fund?
I mean, what's the option?
So you tell me what's the option.
A lot of people ask me, what would I have done different?
Probably not much, because it was pretty much constrained by what could I have done different.
So, no, I think, I mean, that's, again, back to why you have to have the computer, you have to have the inventory, because your assets will be distributed now.
They're distributed in 27 facilities, and there will probably be more.
And so you have to have a distributed system that works.
Now, going from no online catalog to an online catalog in two years is a big jump.
And there's still problems with it.
One of them was I never got any more money to enhance the technology.
In fact, I had to raise the first half.
I spent almost two million dollars with a computer myself, because the city didn't want to buy one.
So when you say, when people ask you what would you have done differently, I mean, you have to admit that it was a public relations disaster when it was discovered that 200,000 books had been somewhere already sent off.
I think those numbers stink.
I don't even think they're close.
I think the figment of Mr. Baker's imagination.
Sort of like when he measured the shelves.
I don't know if you remember that.
He was off 100 percent.
The basic problem with those numbers is before the computer and the computer inventory—there was no inventory.
And any semblance of an inventory was based on a three-by-five card system that had essentially broken down twenty years ago.
Are you following what I'm saying?
Yes, I am.
Because nobody at the time knew how many books this library had.
In fact, when I came in— But you told me that it was determined that there were 2.5 million.
Those were loaded into the computer.
And I'm saying there may be another 50,000, maybe another 100.
I don't know.
You won't know the final number until you've done it, right?
That was one of the other problems of the move and the transition and the spaces.
There were no accurate records.
So how many government documents they had of photographs.
There was virtually no management data in that entire place.
I asked, had technical services, like the second dad came to work, how many books does this library have?
And she said, we don't know.
So I said, would you measure the cards and come up with some kind of numbers?
So they did.
Essentially, it came out an estimated 18 million items.
18 million items.
Right.
But see, there's magazines, there's microphones, there's photographs.
They really don't know how many photographs they have.
You see, we're back to, essentially, it was a manual paper-based system.
A manual, what did you call it?
A manual paper-based system of trying to keep track of 18 million items and 250,000 users.
And it didn't work.
So when you see people throwing numbers about, I don't trust any of them because nobody knew.
Or if they did, they didn't tell me.
So the 200,000 figure, and that's just a figure, you know, that I've fed it.
So that, in your view, is a grossly inflated figure.
Right.
My view is an inaccurate number, and I think he has no basis for it.
What would you think is a more reasonable number?
I don't know, okay?
Because I didn't count the books or the cards.
And there were no records of what was discarded.
And that's a question.
Why accurate?
Why weren't there any records?
Should I take people off the branch library reference desk to do that?
That's not what the neighborhoods were saying.
They wanted their branches open.
And do you feel that there were too many branches?
Do you think maybe some of them could be either consolidated or shut down?
No.
Because I know that was in the... We had two mayors suggest that when they got in deep water.
So, you know, are you bitter about...
You know, I mean, that's a fair question, I think, the way things turned out.
No, I don't think it's fair.
We're getting into personal law terms.
Well, do you think you were made the scapegoat of things?
I don't know.
History will tell.
Do you—I had a long discussion with Mr. Colter the other evening, and, you know, he seems to think that there's a labor union problem that—
is more concerned about union matters than the welfare of the library.
Do you think that there's merit to that position?
Do you care to elaborate at all on that?
Well, the union got rid of my successor, and they started working on me the day it was announced that I was coming.
You mean your predecessor?
My predecessor.
And what do you think communion is?
I can't speculate on that.
Is it trying to protect their positions or create more positions?
Is it economic?
Probably all of the above.
You know, rightly or wrongly, you are perceived as a
a person who, well, I mean, you wrote a book called The Electronic Library.
You know, when there's talk about the library of the future, you produced a tape called The Library of the Future.
You know, the printed book really is not necessarily part of the equation, so to speak.
I looked at that tape last night, and it's got the rare book room, and it's got books and magazines, and I
I don't understand why people who use computers or like computers can't like books.
I mean, I don't understand the mono view of the world or libraries.
I think we're multidimensional institutions.
I think I'm a multidimensional person.
And I don't—I don't believe that the world—life is not—
Life is only a zero-sum game when it comes to time for death.
I think we get a lot further ahead if we look at it as creating a bigger pie.
Creating a bigger what I'm saying?
A bigger pie.
And I think through collaboration and cooperation and those kinds of things, everybody, I think, can be win-win.
But I don't understand people almost instinctively.
I mean, most of the people who talk about the electronic library book haven't read it.
You know, what is your vision of the future library, though?
You must have a sense, clearly, having built four libraries and presided over the construction of this one.
I don't know, do you want a video or a PowerPoint or what?
I've got a whole box of them.
I think that the library of the future will essentially be based on four different variables.
I think the strongest one is community expectations.
And that's getting harder to work with because communities, their expectations are much higher than they used to be.
They want everything.
They want fairly instant service.
They want convenience.
They're not as tractable as they used to be.
Most of them are still nice.
I'm not saying that they're just, as a society, people have a lot less patience.
What I think has not come out in one of the discussions is the new library was designed after we had a benchmark public opinion poll in 1988.
where we hired a professional firm to ask the community what they wanted in their library.
And Susan will give you a copy of that if you would like.
Susan?
The archivist.
She got it.
I gave it.
Okay.
What should I ask you for again?
It's a public opinion poll made in 1988.
Okay.
There's also another poll later done before the 1994 election, which basically reinforces
the public's opinion.
At the time we were designing the main library, we had 40 community focus groups.
And over the process of design, we testified at the Art Commission, the Library Commission, the Board of Services.
We probably had 50 different public hearings.
What is leading up to my contention is I built that building based on what the people of San Francisco want.
not the press, not the literary world.
In fact, I'm starting to sense a lot of the backlash, if you will, is coming from sort of the literary world.
About backlash, in what respect?
Well, the Nicholson-Victor story, Sally up in Portland and Harper, those kinds of things.
I think there's a factor there.
I'm not sure I can quantify or identify.
But I think that maybe the nerves are—they're either more exposed nerves to similar changes, or they're very opportunistic.
So that there is a sense—I mean, I think Nicholson Baker, a very entertaining writer, but I think he's opportunistic as all to that.
Opportunistic in the sense that, what, that there was an opportunity to sell a story to The New Yorker?
He admits his goal in life was to be a writer.
Well, my goal in life was to be a writer, too.
And what he wanted to do was to write enough so that he could support himself, his wife, and his kids.
But, I mean, he does very well.
I mean, just for the sake of argument, he does very well writing fiction.
I have no problem with it.
It's just that when he takes his fiction over into nonfiction, it concerns him.
And you think that really is the source of a lot of the problems here, that story?
No, no, no.
Well, it certainly did make it a national story.
It created a lightning rod.
Created a—in fact, I have another little speech, if you're interested, called— I get all the time in the world, so, you know.
Yeah, I'm afraid I'll probably die.
Well, tell me how interesting we do that, mentally.
Because I have to go back down to San Jose in the morning.
Okay.
But the whole thing on writing the killer surf of the press, I think none of us was prepared for the press coverage.
And I mean that in the broads, not just the papers, but television from Russia, Japan, Chile, France.
Paul showed up shooting pictures, kinds of stuff, on ABC.
Actually, CBS did a very nice piece.
When I'm saying nice— Complementary.
I see it as nice because what they said is what I believe.
I mean, I didn't tell them what's right, but they show children, they show excitement, they show—that kind of thing.
It's—what's his name—Charles Osgood.
Anyway, so the other, I mean, was very similar.
My last library, I had a full-time public relations department.
San Francisco, I never got one.
I took a librarian, Marcia, who you may have been, who has grooved tremendously.
She was a branch librarian.
She started on this.
I tried to get a public relations, public information officer in the budget, and they would say, I wouldn't do that.
So I just kind of went and said, okay, who thinks they want to try it?
And Marsha.
And she's worked real hard, and I have a lot of respect for her.
But she didn't have the training in dealing with it.
I was a public affairs officer in the Navy, I should point out.
Anyway, so a lot of it, when this stuff hit, I mean, just...
We had been working ourselves to the bone to get that place open for a year.
That was seven days a week, seven nights a week, practically.
Practically everyone in the administration working their ass off to get this thing done.
Came down to the wire, because the contractor wasn't through at the building, and the mayor had already decided it would open on April 18th, and it did.
our computer telephone text.
We're working twenty-hour days for two weeks.
And so we got it done.
So everything was pretty fragile.
So we opened it, and we come in, and there's a lot of ooh-and-ah-ing, and people like it, and they love it.
And then all of a sudden, this other stuff kind of starts hitting.
Well, you threw away all the books, really didn't have much shelves, some of which has validity and some truth, some of which greatly exaggerated, and a lot of it irrelevant.
I mean,
I knew that shelving was going to be a problem.
That's why I asked for 100 shelters three years ago.
That got hung up, of course, because I didn't think we could pay $15 an hour to shelve them.
Well, plus the whole, you know, the shelfer was a new job category as opposed to a page, you know, and I guess that caused some disquietude, shall we say.
Well, worse than that, the union fought it to a standstill.
And there will be no shelters, by the way.
That's right.
That's history.
I had no problem with that.
But it's, I had a budget, and I had things I had to get done.
And the good news with the Proposition E, the Charter Amendment, was the budget went up.
The bad news is that was a box.
So if it wasn't enough,
It's called tough.
I have to solve it.
Because no one was going to give me any more money.
And that's fair.
But they should also have given me the authority to solve the problems.
Going back, did you ever input into the design how it looks?
Very much.
Do you think that maybe there's too much open space in there?
No.
That there could be more shelves incorporated in that?
Sure, but not significantly.
I mean, if you want a book warehouse, we could have done that.
It would have been ugly.
Have you ever been in the Madison Building in Washington, D.C.?
I have, but there's been a lot of books in there.
I know, but do you like to spend a lot of time in there?
Do you see it as a community center or a communication center?
But that's not its function.
I know.
but I think the building gap.
Well, tell me then, give me your definition of what a library is.
I think that's very important.
You're a professional librarian who's built four libraries, a major city, certainly a cutting-edge library, and a public library.
What is a library?
Well, I spent two years with Mr. Coulter and the commission defining the mission statement, which the commission adopted and the board of supervisors adopted them.
It's to provide access to the citizens of San Francisco to information, knowledge, the joys of reading, and lifelong learning.
I think the Maine Library does that.
Three times as much as the old one did.
And you said it's a community center, too, so clearly aesthetics are
I mean, do you think they really had that discussion when they built the city hall?
Had what discussion?
How much space they wasted?
They should have just built a square building with bureaucrats' offices.
Well, you know, but they don't have to store two million books or a million books either, you know, and project for the future, too.
I had no plans to put every book for the rest of the library's history in that building.
It makes no sense.
There's a quote that has been attributed to you, that the earthquake of 89 gave an opportunity to, quote, clean the Argyne stables.
Is that an accurate quote?
Did you make that statement?
No.
The statement was made by the columnist Bill Mandel in 1987.
And he said that.
I quoted him once.
Okay.
But he said that.
But did you subscribe to it?
Was it an opportunity to get rid of a lot of the sweeping, so to speak, you know?
Well, you have a half million books on the floor.
Every building is shut down for structural reassessment.
We already had the building planned for the new building.
It seemed like the rational approach was to start moving the collections to where they would be in the new building, rather than just sticking them back where they were.
So with a half a million books on the floor, maybe it is an opportunity to
to accelerate the process, I guess.
Fair statement, I guess.
Right.
I mean, part of it, but it was a little more complicated than that, because most of the books on the floor were in the stack block, the seven-story stack block, which no library in this country will ever build again.
It turned out to be a tremendous chimney in Los Angeles, and
would have killed people in San Francisco if there had been anybody in the stacks.
Fortunately, it was a beautiful October day, and I was at the World Series, along with a lot of people, and since it was open in San Francisco, the city was essentially shut down.
There was only one person in the stack block.
When I went in there the next morning with a hard hat, there were jagged
pieces of glass, because a lot of the floors were glass, so the light would come through.
And there were jagged edges coming down three feet down, and the ceiling was only six and a half feet high anyway.
If there had been people in the middle of that, they would have been killed.
And I remember that vividly.
The building actually performed well, but because the stack block had its own momentum—I mean, that's a heavy sucker, because it's all integrated, full of a million books—it pulled off from the walls.
Anyway, they should have never let the public know stacks in the first place.
The building was designed in 1917 by Carnegie's architects, based on the philosophy of nineteenth-century librarians.
which was that the purpose of libraries was to essentially be a book warehouse.
The public came there to use them.
The circulation was a secondary function.
It used to be in the old libraries.
When it opened, it was in a little alcove.
The periodical room wasn't much bigger than this living room.
It had the stack block.
You put stacks in there.
You had reading rooms.
You had reference desks.
And you had people retrieve the books out of the stacks.
So you probably paid them 12 cents an hour.
Well, over the decades, functions changed.
Libraries got into outreach, got into all the different formats.
In the 60s, for whatever reason, and it took me a long time to kind of run it down, but there is a paper.
Susan probably has it in the archives now.
where one of the library administrators wrote a paper saying that the goal for the San Francisco Public Library should be to be
and essentially tried to use that building in ways it was never designed to function.
So, back to the earthquake.
It made no sense to me to perpetuate the problems that had been there for thirty years.
Okay.
How about the consolidation of subjects?
I mean, there was a humanity section and there was a geography section.